Dungeon Exploration
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The Basics
Dungeon Exploration Cycle
Dungeon Events
Actions
Searching
Resting
Conditions
Panic
Dungeon Elements
Light
Doors
Traps
Example
The Courtyard


The Basics
The dungeon exploration cycle (see below) is divided into a series of turns, actions, and their consequences.
On their turn, a character can move a distance equal to their torchlight’s perimeter (about 40ft), and perform one action. Players can use their action to move up to three times that distance, though that will increase the chance of triggering a roll on the Dungeon Events table.
The Warden should present obvious information about an area and its dangers freely and at no cost. Moving quickly or without caution may increase the chance of encountering a wandering monster, springing a trap, or triggering a roll on the Dungeon Events table.
Although the term “dungeon” is used here, it can be exchanged for any dangerous locale (mansions, farmhouses, adventure site, etc).

Dungeon Exploration Cycle
The Warden describes the party’s surroundings and any immediate dangers (combat, traps, surprises, etc.). The players then declare their character’s intended movements and actions.
The Warden resolves each character’s action simultaneously, as well as any actions that are already in-progress.
The players record any loss of resources and any new conditions (i.e. item use, deprivation, etc). The cycle then begins again. If appropriate, the Warden should roll on the Dungeon Events table.

Dungeon Events
Exploring a dungeon is always dangerous, and time must always be weighed against the risk of awakening the location’s denizens, natural hazards, and worse.
When the party:

Spends more than one dungeon cycle in a single room or location
Moves quickly or haphazardly through a room
Moves into a new area, level, or zone
Creates a loud disturbance
Roll 1d6 on the the Dungeon Events table below.

1	Encounter	Roll on an encounter table. Possibly hostile (see Reactions).
2	Environment	Surroundings shift or escalate. Water rises, ceilings collapse, a ritual nears completion, etc.
3	Loss	Torches are blown out, an ongoing spell fizzles, etc. The party must resolve the effect before moving on.
4	Exhaustion	The PCs must rest soon, otherwise they may need to add a Fatigue, or become deprived.
5	Sign	A “spoor” (clue, track, scent, victim, droppings, etc.) is discovered.
6	Quiet	The party is left alone (and safe) for the time being.

Actions
Actions are any non-passive activities such as searching for traps, forcing open a door, listening for danger, disarming a trap, engaging an enemy in combat, casting a spell, dodging a trap, running away, resting, etc.
Some actions have special rules (see below), while others may take multiple turns to complete.
Loud or noticeable actions may also trigger an encounter of the dungeon’s denizens.

Searching
A character can spend a turn performing an exhaustive search of one object or location in an area, revealing any relevant hidden treasure, traps, secret doors, etc.
Larger rooms and difficult or complex dungeon terrain may take a few turns to properly search.
Searching a room first is a safer way to explore the dungeon, but it has a steep cost: time.

Resting
A character can spend a turn resting to restore all HP.
A light source and a safe location are required to rest. Present or oncoming danger make rest impossible.
Resting does not restore Fatigue, as it is impossible to safely Make Camp in a dungeon.

Conditions

Panic
A character that is surrounded by enemies, enveloped by darkness, or facing their greatest fears may experience panic. A WIL save is typically required to avoid losing control and becoming panicked.
A panicked character must make a WIL save to overcome their condition as an action on their turn.
A panicked character has 0 HP, does not act in the first round of combat, and all of their attacks are impaired.

Dungeon Elements

Light
Torches and other radial sources of light illuminate 40ft of dungeon, and beyond that only a dim outline of objects. Torches last until they are put out by a character or their environment.
A torch can be lit 3 times before permanently degrading. A lantern can be relit 6 times per oil can, but requires more inventory slots.
Characters without a light source may suffer from panic until their situation is remedied.

Doors

Doors and entryways may be locked, stuck, moving or blocked entirely. Characters can try to force a door open (or wedge it shut) using available resources (spikes, glue), or through raw ability.
The character most at risk should save to avoid whatever danger may befall them.
A character can detect, through careful observation (listening, smelling, etc.), signs of life and other hazards through nearby doors and walls.

Traps
A cautious character should be presented with any and all information that would allow them the opportunity to avoid springing a trap. An unwitting character will trigger a trap according to the fiction, or otherwise have a 2-in-6 chance.
Traps can usually be detected by carefully searching a room.
Damage from traps is taken from Attributes (usually STR or DEX) and not from HP. Armor can reduce damage, but only if applicable (e.g. a shield would not reduce damage from noxious gas).
