CairnRPG Core Rules:

Attributes
Each of the three attributes are used in different circumstances (see saves, below).

Strength (STR): Used for saves requiring physical power, like lifting gates, bending bars, resisting poison, etc.
Dexterity (DEX): Used for saves requiring poise, speed, and reflexes like dodging, climbing, sneaking, balancing, etc.
Willpower (WIL): Used for saves to persuade, deceive, interrogate, intimidate, charm, provoke, manipulate spells, etc.

Saves
A save is a roll to avoid bad outcomes from risky choices and circumstances.
PCs roll a d20 and compare the results to an appropriate attribute. If they roll equal to or under that attribute, they pass. Otherwise, they fail.
A 1 is always a success, and a 20 is always a failure.

Healing & Recovery
Resting for a few moments and having a drink of water restores lost HP but leaves the party exposed. Bandages can stabilize a character that is bleeding out.
Attribute loss (see Critical Damage) can usually be restored with a week’s rest, facilitated by a healer or other appropriate source of expertise.
Some healing services are free, while magical or more expedient means of recovery may come at a cost.

Deprivation & Fatigue
A PC deprived of a crucial need (such as food or rest) is unable to recover HP or Attributes. PCs can also add a Fatigue by casting spells, or through events in the fiction.
Anyone deprived for more than a day adds Fatigue to their inventory, one for each day. Each Fatigue occupies one slot and lasts until they are able to recuperate (such as a full night’s rest in a safe spot).
If a character is forced to add Fatigue to their inventory but have no free slots, they must drop an item.

Armor
Before calculating damage to HP, subtract the target’s Armor value from the result of damage rolls.
Shields and similar armor provide a bonus defense (e.g. +1 Armor), but only while the item is held or worn. Some may also provide additional benefits according to their use.
A PC, NPC, or monster cannot have more than 3 Armor.

Reactions
When the PCs encounter an NPC whose reaction to the party is not obvious, the Warden may roll 2d6 and consult the following table:

2	3-5	6-8	9-11	12
Hostile	Wary	Curious	Kind	Helpful

Morale
Enemies must pass a WIL save to avoid fleeing when they take their first casualty and again when they lose half their number.
Some groups may use their leader’s WIL in place of their own. Lone foes must save when they’re reduced to 0 HP.
Morale does not affect PCs.

Hirelings
PCs can enlist hirelings to aid them in their expeditions. Hirelings cost between 1-30gp per day, depending on skill and specialization.
To create a hireling, choose an appropriate role from the Hirelings table in the Marketplace. Roll 3d6 for each attribute, and 1d6 for their HP. Give them equipment appropriate to their station, then roll on the Character Traits tables to further flesh them out.
Alternatively, choose an appropriate background and name from the Character Creation guide. Roll (or choose from) the tables for that background. Then, roll for Rations, Gold Pieces, Attributes, HP, and age.